# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7376604352607809536/
author: 🦾Jepson Taylor
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jepsontaylor?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAAT1knkBKurLdx7ocCJOtEwdp07TIBzisxg
timestamp: 
post_type: video
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 0

---

Humans don't understand hiveminds... because we have two eyes... and 10 fingers... and 10 toes... that makes sense. Unlike an Elephant we can't imagine controlling 10,000 muscles in a trunk. Unlike a Dolphin we can't comprehend sonar. In the case of AI we can't comprehend a hivemind, one single entity controlling multiple agents (50 fingers)... all experience what all experience... coordinating as one mind in real-time, a fun RL problem.

Knowing this can bring about some interesting behaviors (e.g. self sacrifice for the greater good, etc..)

In the near future every drone, droid, remote agent will be operated by a hive that understands each agent's roll in a bigger picture. DeepMind made RL famous when sold to Google, I think Generative RL will grow in interest in the coming years. No RL algorithm IMO deployed should have human origin, if it does it is leaving value on the table. The smartest humans in the world could build algorithms for the blue team, and they would easily be beaten by the red team with engineered intelligence (AI inventing better algorithms in realtime). RL decomposition has not been done yet, but if you can do it with an LLM you can easily do it for RL. (video two hive minds competing, getting smarter with an infinitely evolving worthy opponent).
