# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7285510291709161473/
author: Alex Wang
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexwang2911?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAACby0LMBoQ6kiXlC2BvmLzXW6dcQWnvLGVI
timestamp: 
post_type: text
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 0

---

AI agents are not a type of robot, software, or simple automation.

AI agents are a broad category and aren’t limited to LLMs.

From reinforcement learning agents in robotics, computer vision agents for surveillance, to predictive maintenance agents in manufacturing...They’re all AI agents focused on achieving different goals.

AI agents are autonomous digital entities designed to make decisions, adapt, and take actions independently to achieve specific goals within a dynamic framework.

And they are not the same as Agentic AI or Agentic Workflows.

Think of AI agents as the autonomous 'doers' in a system.

Agentic AI is the overarching concept of AI behaving autonomously and goal-oriented, often involving multiple agents or agentic workflows.

Agentic workflows provide the adaptive structure that enables AI agents to achieve their goals.

In short, AI agents operate within agentic workflows, and Agentic AI refers to the entire approach of autonomous, goal-driven AI systems.

We’re going to see and work with more and more AI agents on a daily basis.

✨Also, this is a topic I’ve been especially interested in lately, and I’ve invited Prof. Jia Li for a deeper conversation about it. I’ll be sharing more details about the interview soon, it’s going to be an interesting one!
__________________

For more on AI and learning materials, please check my previous posts.

I share my learning journey here. Join me and let's grow together. Alex Wang

hashtag
#technology 
hashtag
#aiagents 
hashtag
#artificialintelligence
