# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7304115999564316672/
author: Carly Taylor
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/carly-taylor-data?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAABBVdlsBPeCHOglwXNuV6b9iAIvFwcYiR7E
timestamp: 
post_type: image
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 4

---

This feels crazy to write, but… I’ve made the difficult decision to leave Call of Duty.

I started working there almost 5 years ago as a senior data scientist. I hired my first engineer shortly after that and started tackling some of the hardest problems we faced as an organization.

A LOT of hard work, long weekends, 6 global launches, and awesome wins later, I am stepping away after growing my team of 1 (me!) to a team of 40 highly technical and capable engineers.

From kernel development to machine learning, I feel like I was able to make an impact at every level in our tech stack.

It was an incredibly exciting, challenging, and rewarding journey.

I can’t wait to share with you all where I’ll be heading next, but first I want to take a moment to appreciate the awesome people who made my journey what it was.

Johanna Faries - you gave me permission to find my voice. You are the kind of leader people dream to work for, and the way you command respect through empathy, authenticity and mutual kindness should be studied. You’re the 🐐.

Stephanie Snowden - girl, I would follow you into any battle, any day. You’re one of the strongest people I know, and it was a pleasure being in the trenches with you 🫡 as long as you were around, I knew we were on the right track.

Natalya T. - probably my biggest regret is that I didn’t get to learn more from you. You have a knack for making extraordinarily difficult things look easy. From technical acumen to navigating complex human situations, you never faltered. I appreciated every bit of advice (even when it seemed like I wasn’t listening).

Thank you to everyone who followed my journey with COD! It was the most fun I’ve ever had, and I can’t wait to share what’s next (guesses are welcome 😆)

GLHF ✌️


## Image Analyses

### Image 1
[Image: No alternative text description for this image]

### Image 2
[Image: No alternative text description for this image]

### Image 3
[Image: No alternative text description for this image]

### Image 4
[Image: No alternative text description for this image]

