# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7284936176518471681/
author: Liz Donovan, MS, ACC
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/lrdonovan?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAADgKwYBLJcfLtJKFRyLjp841eAgbq1lDlc
timestamp: 
post_type: video
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 0

---

Don’t negotiate against yourself.

When you voice a vulnerable statement, you might want to jump in to fill the silence.

This leads to you working against yourself by offering more information than necessary and potentially backtracking on your request (though maybe not as extreme as this video…).

I had to train myself to be okay with the silence.

I practiced making a statement and waiting for a response.

At first, the silence felt excruciating. In reality, it wasn't that long and it allowed the other person to form their response.

Even after they answered, I would let silence hang, giving them the space to add more information. People tend to like to fill the silence, and that can be advantageous when you need information.

Silence is a powerful tool to use in any situation, but especially when you’re negotiating your salary. You need to leave space for the other party to give you information.

Learn to be ok with the silence.

I’m conducting a 🚀 free webinar Feb. 7th 🚀 on how to negotiate your salary, giving you a roadmap to go into the process with confidence. You can sign up at the link in the comments.

— 
👋 I'm Liz; a certified coach who empowers women to own their impact and get the recognition they deserve.

🔔 Follow for more lessons learned that you can apply to your own salary negotiation

♻️ Share with others you think would benefit from this content
