# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7317894989638680576/
author: Edward Newton
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/eenewton?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAABrIAwBGmCDFBdIxTBOlgdmAHGQ8ra12pM
timestamp: 
post_type: text
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 0

---

The myth of the lone genius is killing us creatively.

I've been working in entertainment since 2007, in one form or another. The problem of "how do I break through the noise" is not a new one.

I see the same things happening in games that I did in film and TV: people investing hundreds/thousands of hours into something in private, and then standing there, shocked, when no one shows up to the release party.

"But I sweated for years! I worked in silence and committed everything to this, just like they said the greats did it!"

It did not occur to them that they should put their work in front of someone before they put that much work into it.

"But, but, but it's not DONE!"

That really doesn't matter as much as you think it does.

All that matters is that it moves somebody.

And the only way to know is to put it out there and see if it moves someone.

If it does, work on it a little more and see if people respond more. If it doesn't, move on to the next idea.

You are not a AAA studio, you don't have shareholders breathing down your neck for product in Q2. Pack light, iterate fast, and keep trying new ideas. Quantity is, by far, better than quality when you're looking for a new idea.

"But it's not polished, nobody will like it!"

Don't coddle your ideas. Let them stand on their own.

A game that can't rise above its lack of polish doesn't deserve to be polished.
