# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7374904088800460800/
author: 🦾Jepson Taylor
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jepsontaylor?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAAT1knkBKurLdx7ocCJOtEwdp07TIBzisxg
timestamp: 
post_type: image
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 1

---

99% of the internet won't understand this visual or it's significance despite my best efforts to explain. But here is one of the best visuals IMO of superhuman code slapping humans. Visual of 20,000 invented algorithms using Engineered Intelligence: new evolutionary process that decomposes algorithms into smaller components and drives innovation success in a predictable way.

More compute => more innovation, predictable, absent of luck.

The green dots show where humans started... and ran out of ideas, innovation stagnation. A real problem for humans in the algorithm space with AI.

The red dots [KNIFE/MUNOS/CFE] are algorithms that are best in their categories that 10,000 PhDs would not be able to deliver. No amount of money, human brains, or desperation could produce those because they are beyond the reach of the human innovation process (without EI).

An analogy that is maybe more grokable, think of humans being explorers that got stuck on islands. Now with these drones you can find new islands that humans would have never discovered, they didn't have the ships (brains) to discover them. Any questions?

If you were pursuing a PhD in this particular algorithm category I'm sorry, at least you're "learning to learn".


## Image Analyses

### Image 1
[Image: map]

