# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7304148750782935040/
author: 🦾Jepson Taylor
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jepsontaylor?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAAT1knkBKurLdx7ocCJOtEwdp07TIBzisxg
timestamp: 
post_type: image
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 1

---

One of our agents delivered a new record on our internal optimization benchmarks. The reason we hash our algorithms is they are being named internally by the agent. This one is the “AuroraDragon”, currently the highest benchmarking optimizers we have access to. Don't get too attached emotionally, there will always be a better one tomorrow, same is true for generative machine learning algorithms being discovered right now. If you had a billion dollar prize for humans to deliver this type of innovation, they could not using traditional methods. When it comes to algorithm development the human has stalled in comparison.

Something that is kind of fun, I've been doing this for awhile, giving code to image generators and asking them to imagine the code as a creature. Well, this is that new creature.

A funny thing, on the horizon is autonomous white paper generation. So when a new algorithm is invented, sure a human could spend weeks writing a white paper to share with the world, but so can an agent... It's a bit complicated, but completely possible, that you will soon see a flood of white papers that are done with more rigor than the typical researcher. You won't know if they are coming from very smart humans, or smarter agents. A few months ago an academic pushed back on LLMs writing white papers. Sorry not sorry, I have one speed and it's faster than before.


## Image Analyses

### Image 1
[Image: No alternative text description for this image]

