# LinkedIn Post
post_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7299773989583785984/
author: Ben Collins
author_url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/bentcollins?miniProfileUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_profile%3AACoAAA_Sdi0BG0DU6OyryyrAWLW-GZCUQAO-Lyo
timestamp: 
post_type: video
scraped_at: 2026-06-29T00:15:18.086Z
image_count: 0

---

🚀 Introducing Woz - Your AI Technical Cofounder 🚀

Brad Eckert and I are excited to announce that Woz (YC W25) has been accepted to Y Combinator.

Woz is an AI platform that enables non technical entrepreneurs to build and scale real software businesses - eliminating the need for a technical cofounder or developer team.

Historically, the ability to write code and architect software served as a massive barrier to business building. Woz eliminates this barrier with a team of AI agents that enable anyone - regardless of technical ability - to build products, go to market, and grow a business all on one platform.

Our vision is simple: eliminate barriers to business building and make entrepreneurship accessible to all. As AI automates traditional industries and employers reduce headcount, the ability to start and own businesses will become even more important. Woz makes this possible.

We’re incredibly fortunate to be joined by a world-class team of ML scientists and production engineers and to be backed by bold investors - Y Combinator, MGV.VC, Untapped Ventures and more.

✨ If you’ve been itching to launch that mobile app, we’d love to hear from you! Drop us a message or apply for Woz Beta (link in comments).

We can’t wait to see what you build! 🚀
