# NeurIPS 2023 Primer
url: https://www.ruder.io/neurips-2023-primer/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2023-12-01
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

NeurIPS 2023 , arguably this year’s biggest AI conference takes place in two weeks from Dec 10–16 in New Orleans. 3586 papers were accepted to the conference, which are available online . In this post, I’ll discuss a selection of 20 papers related to natural language processing (NLP) that caught my eye, with a focus on oral and spotlight papers. Here are the main trends I observed: Most NLP work at NeurIPS is related to large language models (LLMs). While there are some papers that do not employ LLMs or use a different setting (see Suhr & Artzi below, for instance), papers still presented their contributions in the context of LLMs. Synthetic setups to analyze LLM properties are becoming more common. This is because it is computationally prohibitive to run many different pre-training experiments. Investigated properties range from the emergence of in-context learning and learning using global statistics to chain-of-thought reasoning. Aligning models based on human preferences received a lot of attention. Papers particularly focused on improving RLHF and studying alignment to specific personality traits and beliefs. A comprehensive understanding of in-context learning still remains elusive. Papers studied different aspects of in-context learning such as whether it persists during training and using a Bayesian perspective. Reasoning is still challenging with current models. Papers focused on improving performance on various types of reasoning tasks including pragmatic, graph-based, algorithmic, compositional, and planning-based reasoning. External tools are increasingly used to improve LLMs’ reasoning abilities. These range from external verifiers to code execution modules. Note that some of the methods proposed in these papers such as DPO and QLoRA have already been successfully used in LLM applications. This post was first published in NLP News . Rethinking LLMs This is one of my favorite topics as these papers encourage us to rethink our fundamental assumptions regarding LLMs and provide new insights and perspectives on their inner workings. Lexinvariant Language Models (Huang et al.). One of the fundamental characteristics of LMs that hasn’t changed since the first neural LM paper is the one-to-one mapping between tokens and embeddings. This paper studies whether language modeling can also be done with models that are ‘lexinvariant’, i.e., that do not have fixed token embeddings but assign the lexical permutation of each sequence the same probability. This seems like a strong limitation—but it can serve as a useful inductive bias for recovering substitution cyphers (via an MLP probe) and in-context symbol manipulation. In practice, tokens are encoded using random Gaussian vectors and sampled so that the same token has the same representation within a sequence but different representations across sequences. While this method is mainly of theoretical interest, using it as regularization by using random embeddings only for a subset of tokens improves results on some BIG-bench tasks. Learning from Human Feedback Given the proliferation of different pre-trained LLMs, researchers and practitioners are increasingly looking to improve the next step in the LLM pipeline: learning from human feedback, which is important for maximizing performance on downstream tasks but also for LLM alignment. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model is Secretly a Reward Model (Rafailov et al.). Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is the preferred approach to update LLMs to align with target preferences but is quite complex (it requires first training a reward model and then updating the LLM with RL based on the reward model) and can be unstable. This paper proposes Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), which shows that the same objective can be optimized via a simple classification-based objective on the preference data—without any RL! An important component of the objective is a dynamic, per-example importance weight. DPO has the potential to make aligning LLMs with human preferences much more seamless—and will thus be important for safety research. Fine-Grained Human Feedback Gives Better Rewards for Language Model Training (Wu et al.). This paper addresses another limitation of RLHF, which does not allow the integration of more fine-grained feedback regarding which parts of the generated response are erroneous. The paper proposes Fine-grained RLHF, which a) uses a dense reward model (a reward for every output sentence rather than for the entire output) and b) incorporates multiple reward models for diverse feedback. They experiment on detoxification and long-form question answering where they see improved results compared to RLHF and supervised fine-tuning. Importantly, as providing human preference judgements for RLHF is a complex annotation task, providing more fine-grained feedback is actually not more time-intensive. Expect to see more approaches experimenting with various reward models at different granularities. Continual Learning for Instruction Following from Realtime Feedback (Suhr & Artzi). This paper tackles continual learning from human feedback in a collaborative 3D world environment. They demonstrate a simple approach using a contextual bandit to update the model’s policy using binary rewards. Over 11 rounds of training and deployment, instruction execution accuracy improves from 66.7% to 82.1%. Empirically, in this setting, the feedback data provides a similar amount of learning signal as the supervised data. While their setting differs from the standard text-based scenario, it provides a sketch for how instruction-following agents can continually learn from human feedback. In the future, we will likely see approaches that utilize more expressive feedback such as via natural language. LLM Alignment In order to ensure that LLMs are most useful, it is crucial to align them with the specific guidelines, safety policies, personality traits and beliefs that are relevant for a
