# Challenges and Opportunities in NLP Benchmarking
url: https://www.ruder.io/nlp-benchmarking/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2021-08-23
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

Over the last years, models in NLP have become much more powerful, driven by advances in transfer learning . A consequence of this drastic increase in performance is that existing benchmarks have been left behind. Recent models "have outpaced the benchmarks to test for them" ( AI Index Report 2021 ), quickly reaching super-human performance on standard benchmarks such as SuperGLUE and SQuAD . Does this mean that we have solved natural language processing? Far from it. However, the traditional practices for evaluating performance of NLP models, using a single metric such as accuracy or BLEU, relying on static benchmarks and abstract task formulations no longer work as well in light of models' surprisingly robust superficial natural language understanding ability. We thus need to rethink how we design our benchmarks and evaluate our models so that they can still serve as useful indicators of progress going forward. This post aims to give an overview of challenges and opportunities in benchmarking in NLP, together with some general recommendations. I tried to cover perspectives from recent papers, talks at ACL 2021 as well as at the ACL 2021 Workshop on Benchmarking: Past, Present and Future , in addition to some of my own thoughts. Header image: Performance on SQuAD 2.0 over time (Credit: Papers with Code ) Table of contents: What is a benchmark? A brief history of benchmarking Metrics matter Consider the downstream use case Fine-grained evaluation The long tail of benchmark performance Large-scale continuous evaluation What is a benchmark? "Datasets are the telescopes of our field." — Aravind Joshi The original use of the term refers to horizontal marks made by surveyors in stone structures, into which an angle-iron could be placed to form a "bench" for a leveling rod . Figuratively, a benchmark refers to a standard point of reference against which things can be compared. A benchmark as it is used in ML or NLP typically has several components: it consists of one or multiple datasets, one or multiple associated metrics, and a way to aggregate performance. A benchmark sets a standard for assessing the performance of different systems that is agreed upon by the community. To ensure that a benchmark is accepted by the community, many recent benchmarks either select a representative set of standard tasks, such as GLUE or XTREME or actively solicit task proposals from the community, such as SuperGLUE , GEM , or BIG-Bench . For people in the field, benchmarks are crucial tools to track progress. Aravind Joshi said that without benchmarks to assess the performance of our models, we are just like "astronomers wanting to see the stars but refusing to build telescopes". For practitioners and outsiders, benchmarks provide an objective lens into a field that enables them to identify useful models and keep track of a field's progress. For instance, the AI Index Report 2021 uses SuperGLUE and SQuAD as a proxy for overall progress in natural language processing. Reaching human performance on influential benchmarks is often seen as a key milestone for a field. AlphaFold 2 reaching performance competitive with experimental methods on the CASP 14 competition marked a major scientific advance in the field of structural biology . A brief history of benchmarking "Creating good benchmarks is harder than most imagine." —John R. Mashey; foreword to Systems Benchmarking (2020) Benchmarks have a long history of being used to assess the performance of computational systems . The Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation ( SPEC ), established in 1988 is one of the oldest organisations dedicated to benchmarking the performance of computer hardware. Crucially, SPEC had support from most important companies in the field. Every year, it would release different benchmark sets, each composed of multiple programs, with performance measured as the geometric mean of millions of instructions per second ( MIPS ). A recent ML-specific analogue to SPEC is MLCommons , which organises the MLPerf series of performance benchmarks focusing on model training and inference. Similar to SPEC, MLPerf has a broad base of support from academia and industry, building on previous individual efforts for measuring performance such as DeepBench by Baidu or DAWNBench by Stanford. For US agencies such as DARPA and NIST , benchmarks played a crucial role in measuring and tracking scientific progress. Early benchmarks for automatic speech recognition (ASR) such as TIMIT and Switchboard were funded by DARPA and coordinated by NIST starting in 1986. Later influential benchmarks in other areas of ML such as MNIST were also based on NIST data. For language technology and information retrieval (IR), NIST ran the DARPA-funded TREC series of workshops covering a wide array of tracks and topics, which can be seen below. TREC organised competitions built on an evaluation paradigm pioneered by Cranfield in the 1960s where models are evaluated based on a set of test collections, consisting of documents, questions, and human relevance judgements. As the variance in performance across topics is large, scores are averaged over many topics. TREC's "standard, widely available, and carefully constructed set of data laid the groundwork for further innovation" ( Varian, 2008 ) in IR. Tasks and topics in the TREC workshops from 1992–2020 (Credit: Ellen Voorhees ) Many recent influential benchmarks such as ImageNet , SQuAD , or SNLI are large in scale, consisting of hundreds of thousands of examples and were developed by academic groups at well-funded universities. In the era of deep learning, such large-scale datasets have been credited as one of the pillars driving progress in research, with fields such as NLP or biology witnessing their 'ImageNet moment' . As models have become more powerful and general-purpose, benchmarks have become more application-oriented and increasingly moved from single-task to multi-task and single-domain to multi-domain benchmarks. Key exa
