# Command R+
url: https://www.ruder.io/command-r/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2024-04-15
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

Update August 30, 2024 : We've released updated versions of Command R and R+ . This post is an update on what I’ve been up to since I joined Cohere. I’ve had fun contributing to the launch of Command R and R+ , the latest Cohere models. Command R+ is ranked as the top open-weights model on Chatbot Arena , even outperforming some versions of GPT-4. Why is this exciting? This post was first published in NLP News . Chatbot Arena Let’s talk about why we should care about Chatbot Arena rankings in the first place. I’ve written in the past about challenges in NLP benchmarking . Pre-LLM benchmarks such as SuperGLUE mostly consist of classification tasks and no longer provide sufficient signal to differentiate the latest generation of LLMs. More recent benchmarks such as MT-Bench consist of small samples of open-ended questions and rely on LLMs as evaluators, which have their own sets of biases . MMLU , one of the most widely used benchmarks consisting of 14k multiple-choice questions sourced from public sources covering 57 domains has been featured prominently in GPT-4 , Claude 3 , and Mistral Large posts. The data is not without errors , however, and given its release in 2020, training data of recent models is likely at least partially contaminated . Chatbot Arena is a platform where users rate conversations in a blind A/B test. They can continue the conversation until they choose a winner. Of course, short user interactions often do not reveal more advanced model capabilities and annotators can be fooled by authoritative but non-factual answers . Nevertheless, this is the closest to an assessment on realistic user interactions that we currently have. As models are always evaluated based on new user conversations, there is no risk of data contamination. Command R+ outperforms versions of GPT-4 on Chatbot Arena while being much cheaper to use. It does also well on use cases that are under-represented in Chatbot Arena such as RAG, tool use, and multilinguality. (left) Performance comparison of Command R+, Mistral-Large, and GPT4-turbo on three key capabilities: Multilingual, RAG, and Tool Use. (right) Comparison input and output token costs per million for models available on Azure. Source A GPT-4 Level Model on Your Computer Command R+ consists of 104B parameters with publicly available weights . This is the first time that a model that is close to GPT-4 performance is available for research use. With the right setup, Command R+ can generate text at a rate of 111 tokens/s (!) when deployed locally. To understand how to effectively prompt the model, check out the prompting guide . I’m excited about what this means for the open-source community and research, with the gap between closed-source and open-weight models closing and SOTA-level conversational models being more easily accessible. The gap between closed-source and open-weights models on Chatbot Arena is closing (source: Maxime Labonne ). Other recently released models such as DBRX (132B parameters), Mixtral 8x22B (176B parameters), and Grok-1 (314B parameters) are based on a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE), trading off inference speed for memory costs. While these models only activate a subset of parameters for each token, they still require storing all parameters in-memory, which makes them harder to use locally. So far, they are not available or rank much lower than Command R+ on Chatbot Arena . Command R+ comes with a non-commercial license. If you want to self-host or fine-tune it for commercial purposes, we’ll work with you to find something that works for you. RAG and Tool Use While Command R+ can be used as a chatbot, it has been designed for enterprise use. Faithful and verifiable responses are especially important in an enterprise setting. Reducing hallucinations and providing trustworthy responses are important research challenges. There are different ways to mitigate hallucinations, ranging from debiasing and model editing to specialized decoding strategies (see Huang et al. (2023) for an overview). Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG; Lewis et al., 2020 ), which conditions on the LLM’s generation on retrieved documents is the most practical paradigm IMO. Command R+ uses RAG with in-line citations to provide grounded responses. However, evaluation of the quality and trustworthiness of such responses is challenging and motivated the development of new evaluation frameworks such as Attributable to Identified Sources (AIS; Rashkin et al., 2023 ). On our internal human evaluation measuring citation fidelity, Command R+ outperforms GPT4-turbo. On public multi-hop QA benchmarks, it outperforms models at the same price point such as Claude 3 Sonnet and Mistral-large. (left) Human head-to-head preference results using a holistic grading scheme combining text fluency, citation quality, and overall utility. (right) Accuracy of multi-hop REACT agents powered by various models with access to the same search tools retrieving from Wikipedia (HotpotQA) and the Internet (Bamboogle and StrategyQA). Source You can easily use RAG via the API on the Internet or your own documents. A complete RAG workflow involves document search and reranking, which can be seen in this Colab with an example RAG setup on Wikipedia. Example of basic RAG usage with Command models using the Cohere API ( source ). In enterprise settings, seamless integrations with existing APIs and services is crucial. I’ve written before about the promise of tool-augmented models. Tools can help decompose complex problems and make LLMs outputs more interpretable by enabling users to look at the trace of API calls. Command R+ has been trained for zero-shot multi-step tool use. On public tool use benchmarks, it outperforms GPT4-turbo. Conversational tool-use and single-turn function-calling evaluations using Microsoft’s ToolTalk (Hard) benchmark ( Farn & Shin 2023 ) and Berkeley's Function Calling Leaderboard (BFCL) ( Yan et al. 2024 ). Source The recommended way to leverage multi-step tool us
