# The State of Multilingual AI
url: https://www.ruder.io/state-of-multilingual-ai/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2022-11-14
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

Models that allow interaction via natural language have become ubiquitious. Research models such as BERT and T5 have become much more accessible while the latest generation of language and multi-modal models are demonstrating increasingly powerful capabilities. At the same time, a wave of NLP startups has started to put this technology to practical use. While such language technology may be hugely impactful, recent models have mostly focused on English and a handful of other languages with large amounts of resources. Developing models that work for more languages is important in order to offset the existing language divide and to ensure that speakers of non-English languages are not left behind, among many other reasons . This post takes a closer look at how the AI community is faring in this endeavour. I will be focusing on topics related to natural language processing (NLP) and African languages as these are the domains I am most familiar with. I've tried to cover as many contributions as possible but undoubtedly missed relevant work. Feel free to leave a comment or reach out with a pointer to anything I missed. This post is partially based on a keynote I gave at the Deep Learning Indaba 2022 . It covers the following high-level topics: Status Quo Recent Progress Challenges and Opportunities Status Quo There are around 7,000 languages spoken around the world. Around 400 languages have more than 1M speakers and around 1,200 languages have more than 100k [1] . Bender [2] highlighted the need for language independence in 2011. Reviewing papers published at ACL 2008, she found that 63% of all papers focused on English. For a recent study [3] , we similarly reviewed papers from ACL 2021 and found that almost 70% of papers only evaluate on English. 10 years on, little thus seems to have changed. Many languages in Africa, Asia, and the Americas that are spoken by tens of millions of people have received little research attention [1:1] [4] . Continents such as Africa with around 2,000 languages or individual countries such as Indonesia with around 700 languages are incredibly linguistically diverse and at the same time dramatically underserved by current research and technology. Beyond individual languages, researchers with affiliations in countries where such languages are spoken are similarly under-represented in both ML and NLP communities. For instance, while we can observe a slight upward trend in the number of authors affiliated with African universities publishing at top machine learning (ML) and NLP venues, this increase pales compared to the thousands of authors from other regions publishing in such venues every year. Representation of African NLP Researchers in top ML and NLP venues. *: does not consider African authors working abroad. Data is based on: ml_nlp_paper_data by Marek Rei. NLP venues: ACL, CL, COLING, CoNLL, EACL, EMNLP, NAACL, TACL; ML venues: AAAI, ICLR, ICML, NeurIPS. Current state-of-the-art models in many ML domains are mainly based on two ingredients: 1) large, scalable architectures (often based on the Transformer [5] ) and 2) transfer learning [6] . Given the general nature of these models, they can be applied to various types of data including images [7] , video [8] , and audio [9] . Some of the most successful models in recent NLP are BERT [10] , RoBERTa [11] , BART [12] , T5 [13] , and DeBERTa [14] , which have been trained on billions of tokens of online text using variants of masked language modeling in English. In speech, wav2vec 2.0 [15] has been pre-trained on large amounts of unlabeled speech. Multilingual models These models have multilingual analogues—in NLP, models such as mBERT , RemBERT [16] , XLM-RoBERTa [17] , mBART [18] , mT5 [19] , and mDeBERTa [14:1] —that were trained in a similar fashion, predicting randomly masked tokens on data of around 100 languages. Compared to their monolingual counterparts, these multilingual models require a much larger vocabulary to represent tokens in many languages. A number of factors has been found to be important for learning robust multilingual representations, including shared tokens [20] , subword fertility [21] , and word embedding alignment [22] . In speech, models such as XSLR [23] and UniSpeech [24] are pre-trained on large amounts of unlabeled data in 53 and 60 languages respectively. The curse of multilinguality Why do these models only cover up to 100 languages? One reason is the 'curse of multilinguality' [17:1] . Similar to models that are trained on many tasks, the more languages a model is pre-trained on, the less model capacity is available to learn representations for each language. Increasing the size of a model ameliorates this to some extent, enabling the model to dedicate more capacity to each language [25] . Lack of pre-training data Another limiting factor is the availability of text data on the web, which is skewed towards languages spoken in Western countries and with a large online footprint. The languages with the most online resources available for pre-training are typically prioritized, leading to an under-representation of languages with few resources due to this top-heavy selection. This is concerning as prior studies have shown that the amount of pre-training data in a language correlates with downstream performance for some tasks [26] [27] [28] . In particular, languages and scripts that were never seen during pre-training often lead to poor performance [29] [30] . Amount of data in GiB (log-scale) for the 88 languages that appear in both Wikipedia and CommonCrawl ( Conneau et al., 2020 ). Quality issues in existing multilingual resources Even for languages where data is available, past work has shown that some commonly used multilingual resources have severe quality issues. Entity names in Wikidata are not in the native script for many under-represented languages while entity spans in WikiAnn [31] , a weakly supervised multilingual named entity recognition dataset based on Wikiped
