# ACL 2022 Highlights
url: https://www.ruder.io/acl2022/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2022-06-06
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

ACL 2022 took place in Dublin from 22nd–27th May 2022. This was my first in-person conference since ACL 2019. This is also my first conference highlights post since NAACL 2019 . With 1032 accepted papers (604 long, 97 short, 331 in Findings), this post can only offer a glimpse of the diverse research presented at the conference—biased towards my research interests. Here are the themes that were most noticeable for me across the conference program: Language Diversity and Multimodality Prompting Next Big Ideas Favorite Papers The Dark Matter of Language and Intelligence Hybrid Conference Experience Here are highlights of other conference attendees: Multimodality at ACL 2022 by Mubashara Akhtar Notes from ACL 2022 by Jindřich Libovický My First In-Person NLP Conference by Yong Zheng-Xin If you attended ACL, I encourage you to reflect on and write up your impressions of the conference (send me a message and I will link them here). Language diversity and multimodality Panelists and their spoken languages at the ACL 2022 keynote panel on supporting linguistic diversity. ACL 2022 had a theme track on the topic of “Language Diversity: from Low-Resource to Endangered Languages”. Beyond the excellent papers in the track, language diversity also permeated other parts of the conference. Steven Bird hosted a panel on language diversity featuring researchers speaking and studying under-represented languages ( slides ). The panelists shared their experiences and discussed interlingual power dynamics, among other topics. They also made practical suggestions to encourage more work on such languages: creating data resources; establishing a conference track for work on low-resource and endangered languages; and encouraging researchers to apply their systems to low-resource language data. They also mentioned a positive development, that researchers are becoming more aware of the value of high-quality datasets. Overall, the panelists emphasised that working with such languages requires respect—towards the speakers, the culture, and the languages themselves. Endangered languages were also the focus of the Compute-EL workshop . In the awards ceremony, the best linguistic insight paper proposed KinyaBERT, a pre-trained model for Kinyarwanda that leverages a morphological analyzer. The best theme paper developed speech synthesis models for three Canadian indigenous languages. The latter is an example of how multimodal approaches can benefit language diversity. Other multimodal papers leveraged phone representations to improve NER performance in Swahili and Kinyarwanda ( Leong & Whitenack ). For low-resource text-to-speech, Lux & Vu employ articulatory features such as position (e.g., frontness of the tongue) and category (e.g., voicedness), which generalize better to unseen phonemes. Some work also explored new multimodal applications such as detecting fingerspelling in American sign language ( Shi et al. ) or translating songs for tonal languages ( Guo et al. ). The Multilingual Multimodal workshop hosted a shared task on multilingual visually grounded reasoning on the MaRVL dataset . Seeing the emergence of such multilingual multimodal approaches is particularly encouraging as it is an improvement over the previous year’s ACL where multimodal approaches mainly dealt with English (based on an analysis of “multi-dimensional” NLP research we did for an ACL 2022 Findings paper ). My invited talk on scaling NLP systems to the next 1000 languages. In an invited talk ( slides ), I emphasized multimodality in addition to three other challenges towards scaling NLP systems to the next 1,000 languages: computational efficiency, real-world evaluation, and language varieties. Multimodality is also at the heart of the ACL 2022 D&I Special Initiative “60-60 Globalization via localisation” announced by Mona Diab. The initiative focuses on making Computational Linguistics (CL) research accessible in 60 languages and across all modalities, including text/speech/sign language translation, closed captioning, and dubbing. Another useful aspect of the initiative is the curation of the most common CL terms and their translation into 60 languages. The unavailability of accurate scientific expressions poses a barrier to entry in many languages (see this related Masakhane project to decolonise science). The CL community is well positioned to advance the accessibility of scientific content and I am excited to see the progress of this grassroots initiative. Under-represented languages typically have little text data available. Two tutorials focused on applying models to such low-resource settings. The tutorial on learning with limited text data discussed data augmentation, semi-supervised learning, and applications to multilinguality while the tutorial on zero-shot and few-shot NLP with pre-trained language models covered prompting, in-context learning, gradient-based LM task adaptation, among others. The KinyaBERT model architecture. The morphological analyzer produces morphemes for each word. Embeddings of POS tags (red), affix set (purple), affixes (green), and stems (yellow) are fed into a shallow transformer encoder. The output is then processed by a standard transformer encoder ( Nzeyimana & Rubungo ). How to optimally represent tokens across different languages is an open problem. The conference program featured several new approaches to overcome this challenge. KinyaBERT ( Nzeyimana & Rubungo ) leveraged a morphological word segmentation approach. Similarly, Hofmann et al. propose a method that aims to preserve the morphological structure of words during tokenization. The algorithm tokenizes a word by determining its longest substring in the vocabulary and then recursing on the remaining string until a certain number of recursive calls. Rather than choosing subwords that occur frequently in the multilingual pre-training data (which biases the model towards high-resource languages), Patil et al. propose a method that prefers subwo
