# NLP Research in the Era of LLMs
url: https://www.ruder.io/nlp-research-era-of-llms/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2023-12-19
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

NLP research has undergone a paradigm shift over the last year. A range of large language models (LLMs) has validated the unreasonable effectiveness of scale. Currently, the state of the art on most benchmarks is held by LLMs that are expensive to fine-tune and prohibitive to pre-train outside of a few industry labs. In the past, a barrier to doing impactful research has often been a lack of awareness of fruitful research areas and compelling hypotheses to explore. In contrast, NLP researchers today are faced with a constraint that is much harder to overcome: compute. In an era where running state-of-the-art models requires a garrison of expensive GPUs, what research is left for academics, PhD students, and newcomers to NLP without such deep pockets? Should they focus on the analysis of black-box models and niche topics ignored by LLM practitioners? In this post, I first argue why the current state of research is not as bleak—rather the opposite! I will then highlight five research directions that are important for the field and do not require much compute. I take inspiration from the following reviews of research directions in the era of LLMs: Togelius & Yannakakis. (Mar 2023). Choose Your Weapon: Survival Strategies for Depressed AI Academics Ignat et al. (May 2023). A PhD Student's Perspective on Research in NLP in the Era of Very Large Language Models Li et al. (Oct 2023). Defining a New NLP Playground Saphra et al. (Nov 2023). First Tragedy, then Parse: History Repeats Itself in the New Era of Large Language Models Manning (Dec 2023). Academic NLP research in the Age of LLMs: Nothing but blue skies! EMNLP 2023 Keynote talk , recording A (requires EMNLP 2023 registration), recording B (requires Underline account) I highly recommend these for different perspectives on current LLM research and for a broader overview of research topics beyond the ones presented in this article. This post was first published in NLP News . A Cause for Optimism Research is cyclical. Computer scientist and ACL lifetime achievement award recipient Karen Spärck Jones wrote in 1994 : Those […] who had been around for a long time, can see old ideas reappearing in new guises […]. But the new costumes are better made, of better materials, as well as more becoming: so research is not so much going round in circles as ascending a spiral. In the same vein, Saphra et al. (2023) highlight the similarities between the current era of LLMs and the Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) era where translation performance was shown to scale by training a phrase-based language model on more and more web data. Results slide of Franz Och’s keynote talk at a 2005 MT workshop. Credit: Saphra et al. (2023) . More recently, we have seen the success of scale with the advent of word embeddings in 2013 and the emergence of pre-trained LMs in 2018. In all cases, academic research was not left in the dust but went on to make contributions that shaped the next era, from KenLM ( Heafield, 2011 ), an efficient LM library that enabled academics to outperform industry MT systems, to the word2vec alternative GloVe ( Pennington et al., 2014 ), to pre-trained LMs developed in non-profits and academia such as ELMo ( Peters et al., 2018 ) and ULMFiT ( Howard & Ruder, 2018 ). The main lesson here is that while massive compute often achieves breakthrough results, its usage is often inefficient. Over time, improved hardware, new techniques, and novel insights provide opportunities for dramatic compute reduction. In his 2018 article , Stephen Merity provides two examples of this trend where the first instance of a method was exorbitantly compute-intensive while only a year later, compute costs were dramatically reduced: New York Times (2012): " How Many Computers to Identify a Cat? 16,000 (CPU cores) " One year later: " three servers each with two quad-core CPUs and four Nvidia GeForce GTX 680 GPUs " Neural Architecture Search: " 32,400-43,200 GPU hours " Just over a year later: " single Nvidia GTX 1080Ti GPU , the search for architectures takes less than 16 hours " (1000x less) ( paper ) We could argue why the same trend may not be true for this era of LLMs. After all, new techniques can also be scaled up and scale ultimately prevails as we know. In addition, the current trend of closed-source models makes it harder to build on them. On the other hand, new powerful open-source models are still released regularly. Companies are also incentivized to invest in the development of smaller models in order to reduce inference cost. Finally, we are starting to see the limits of scale on the horizon: recent LLMs are reaching the limits of text data online and repeating data eventually leads to diminishing returns ( Muennighoff et al., 2023 ) while Moore’s law is approaching its physical limits . There are already recent examples that require a fraction of compute by using new methods and insights, demonstrating that this trend also holds in the era of LLMs: FlashAttention ( Dao et al., 2022 ) provides drastic speedups over standard attention through clever hardware optimization. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods (see our EMNLP 2022 tutorial for an overview) including adapters such as LoRA ( Hu et al., 2021 ) and QLoRA ( Dettmers et al., 2023 ) enable fine-tuning LLMs on a single GPU. Phi-2 , a new 2.7B-parameter LLM released last week matches or outperforms models up to 25x its size. In the near term, the largest models using the most compute will continue to be the most capable. However, there remains a lot of room for innovation by focusing on strong smaller models and on areas where compute requirements will inexorably be eroded by research progress. While LLM projects typically require an exorbitant amount of resources, it is important to remind ourselves that research does not need to assemble full-fledged massively expensive systems in order to have impact . Chris Manning made the nice analogy in his EMNLP 2023 keynote that in the same vein, aero
