# Modular Deep Learning
url: https://www.ruder.io/modular-deep-learning/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2023-02-23
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

This post gives a brief overview of modularity in deep learning. For a more in-depth review, refer to our survey . For modular fine-tuning for NLP, check out our EMNLP 2022 tutorial . For more resources, check out modulardeeplearning.com . Fuelled by scaling laws, state-of-the-art models in machine learning have been growing larger and larger. These models are monoliths. They are pre-trained from scratch in highly choreographed engineering endeavours. Due to their size, fine-tuning has become expensive while alternatives, such as in-context learning are often brittle in practice. At the same time, these models are still bad at many things—symbolic reasoning, temporal understanding, generating multilingual text, etc. Modularity may help us address some of these outstanding challenges. By modularising models, we can separate fundamental knowledge and reasoning abilities about language, vision, etc from domain and task-specific capabilities. Modularity also provides a versatile way to extend models to new settings and to augment them with new abilities. We give an in-depth overview of modularity in our survey on Modular Deep Learning. In the following, I will highlight some of the most important observations and takeaways related to the following concepts: Taxonomy Computation Function Routing Function Aggregation Function Training Setting Purposes of Modularity Applications in Transfer Learning Future Directions Conclusion Taxonomy We categorise modular approaches based on four dimensions: Computation function : How the module is implemented. Routing function : How active modules are selected. Aggregation function : How outputs of active modules are aggregated. Training setting : How modules are trained. We provide case studies of different configurations of these components below. Case studies of modular deep learning. Green components illustrate different routing functions , shade-of-purple components illustrate different modular computation functions . (a) MAD-X uses adapter layers with fixed routing for zero-shot cross-lingual transfer. (b) Polytropon uses low-rank adapters with hard learned routing for few-shot task adaptation. (c) MoE Transformers use MLPs with top-$k$ soft routing to scale to large model sizes. Computation Function We consider a neural network $f_\theta$ as a composition of functions $f_{\theta_1} \odot f_{\theta_2} \odot \ldots \odot f_{\theta_l}$, each with their own set of parameters $\theta_i$. A function can be a layer or a component of a layer such as a linear transformation. We identify three core types of computation functions that compose a module with parameters $\phi$ with a model’s functions: Parameter composition. Modules modify the model on the level of individual weights: $f_i^\prime(\boldsymbol{x}) = f_{\theta_i \oplus \phi}(\boldsymbol{x})$. Input composition. A function's input $\boldsymbol{x}$ is concatenated with the module parameters: $f_i^\prime(\boldsymbol{x}) = f_{\theta_i}([\boldsymbol{x}, \phi])$. Function composition. The outputs of the model's function and the module are combined: $f_i^\prime(\boldsymbol{x}) = f_{\theta_i} \odot f_{\phi}(\boldsymbol{x})$. We provide an overview of the three comptuation functions (in addition to a hypernetwork) as part of a Transformer architecture below: Different computation functions in a Transformer architecture. Task-specific modular components are illustrated in magenta and purple. (a) Parameter Composition: A sparse sub-network in the linear layer as part of multi-head-attention. (b) Input Composition: Prefix tuning extends the input by prepending embeddings to key and value matrices in the Transformer layer. (c) Function Composition: Task-specific bottleneck layers that transform the hidden representations are inserted in each layer. (d) Hypernetwork: A small separate neural network generates modular parameters conditioned on metadata. Parameter composition. We identify two main ways modules are used to change the parameters of a model: a) updating a sparse subset of parameters and b) updating parameters in a low-dimensional subspace. Sparse methods are closely related to pruning and the lottery ticket hypothesis . Sparse methods can be structured and only applied to specific parameter groups. Input composition. Prompt-based learning can be seen as finding a task-specific text prompt whose embedding $\phi$ elicits the desired behaviour. Alternatively, continuous prompts can be learned directly—in the input or at each layer of a model. Function composition. This is the most general category. It subsumes standard multi-task learning methods, modules that adapt a pre-trained model (known as 'adapters'), and rescaling methods. In addition, parameter and input composition methods can also be expressed as function composition. For illustration, we provide examples of three function composition methods below. Different approaches of function composition. (a) Sequential Bottleneck Adapter : The first adapter architecture proposed for Transformers consisting of two bottleneck layers placed after the multi-head attention (MHA) and feed-forward (FF) layers. (b) Parallel Bottleneck Adapter : Bottleneck layers processed in parallel to the MHA and FF layers of the pre-trained transformer components. (c) (IA)$^3$ : Rescaling operations performed within the MHA and FF layers. Module parameter generation. Instead of learning module parameters directly, they can be generated using an auxiliary model (a hypernetwork) conditioned on additional information and metadata. We provide a high-level overview of some of the trade-offs of the different computation functions below. Refer to the tutorial slides or the survey for detailed explanations. Parameter efficiency Training efficiency Inference efficiency Performance Compositionality Parameter composition + - ++ + + Input composition ++ -- -- - + Function composition - + - ++ + Routing Function A routing function $r(\cdot)$ determines which modules are active based on a g
