# Multi-domain Multilingual Question Answering
url: https://www.ruder.io/multi-qa-tutorial/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2021-12-06
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

This post expands on the EMNLP 2021 tutorial on Multi-domain Multilingual Question Answering . The tutorial was organised by Avi Sil and me. In this post, I highlight key insights and takeaways of the tutorial. The slides are available online . You can find the table of contents below: Introduction Open-Retrieval QA vs Reading Comprehension What is a Domain? Multi-Domain QA Datasets for Multi-Domain QA Multi-Domain QA Models Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for QA Domain Adaptation with Pre-trained LMs Domain Generalization Multilingual QA Datasets for Multilingual QA Issues of Multilingual QA Datasets Creating QA Datasets Multilingual QA Evaluation Multilingual QA Models Models for Multilingual Reading Comprehension Models for Multilingual Open-Retrieval QA Open Research Directions Introduction Question answering is one of the most impactful tasks in natural language processing (NLP). In the tutorial, we focus on two main categories of question answering studied in the literature: open-retrieval question answering (ORQA) and reading comprehension (RC). Open-Retrieval QA vs Reading Comprehension Open-retrieval QA focuses on the most general setting where given a question we first need to retrieve relevant documents from a large corpus such as Wikipedia. We then process these documents to identify the relevant answer as can be seen below. We avoid using the term open-domain QA as "open-domain" may also refer to a setting covering many domains. Open-Retrieval Question Answering (image based on Chen et al., 2017 ) Reading comprehension can be seen as a sub-problem of open-retrieval QA as it assumes that we have access to the gold paragraph that contains the answer (see below). We then only need to find the corresponding answer in this paragraph. In both settings, answers are commonly represented as a minimal span. Reading Comprehension assumes a gold paragraph is provided Standard approaches for reading comprehension build on pre-trained models such as BERT. The model is provided with the question and candidate paragraph as input and is trained to predict whether the question is answerable (typically using the representation associated with its [CLS] token) and whether each token is the start or end of an answer span, which can be seen below. The same approach can be used for ORQA, with some modifications ( Alberti et al., 2019 ). Using BERT for reading comprehension involves fine-tuning it to predict a) whether a question is answerable and b) whether each token is the start and end of an answer span. Information retrieval (IR) methods are used to retrieve the relevant paragraphs. Classic sparse methods such as BM25 ( Robertson et al., 2009 ) do not require any training as they weigh terms and documents based on their frequency using tf-idf measures. Recent dense neural approaches such as DPR ( Karpukhin et al., 2020 ) train models to maximize the similarity between question and passage and then retrieve the most relevant passages via maximum inner product search. What is a Domain? A domain can be seen as a manifold in a high-dimensional variety space consisting of many dimensions such as socio-demographics, language, genre, sentence type, etc ( Plank et al., 2016 ). Domains differ in terms of their granularity and large domains such as Twitter can consist of several more narrow domains to which we might want to adapt our models. Two major facets of this variety space are genre (we will use this term interchangeably with 'domain') and language , which will be the focus of this post. Domain granularity (Credit: Gururangan et al., 2020 ) Multi-Domain QA In each of the two main sections of this post, we will first discuss common datasets and then modelling approaches. Datasets for Multi-Domain QA Research in question answering has spanned many domains, as can be seen below. The most common domain is Encyclopedia , which covers many Wikipedia-based datasets such as SQuAD ( Rajpurkar et al., 2016 ), Natural Questions (NQ; Kwiatkowski et al., 2019 ), DROP ( Dua et al., 2019 ), and WikiReading ( Hewlett et al., 2016 ), among many others. Datasets in this domain are typically referred to as "open-domain" QA. RC Olympics: The many domains of reading comprehension Datasets in the Fiction domain typically require processing narratives in books such as NarrativeQA ( Kočiský et al., 2018 ), Children's Book Test ( Hill et al., 2016 ), and BookTest ( Bajgar et al., 2016 ) or narratives written by crowd workers such as MCTest ( Richardson et al., 2013 ), MCScript ( Modi et al., 2016 ), and ROCStories ( Mostafazedh et al., 2016 ). Academic tests datasets target science questions in US school tests such as ARC ( Clark et al., 2018 ), college-level exam resources such as ReClor ( Yu et al., 2019 ) and school-level exam resources such as RACE ( Lai et al., 2017 ). News datasets include NewsQA ( Trischler et al., 2017 ), CNN / Daily Mail ( Hermann et al., 2015 ), and NLQuAD ( Soleimani et al., 2021 ). In addition, there are datasets focused on Specialized Expert Materials including manuals, reports, scientific papers, etc. Such domains are most common in industry as domain-specific chatbots are increasingly used by companies to respond to users queries but associated datasets are rarely made available. Existing datasets focus on tech forums such as TechQA ( Castelli et al., 2020 ) and AskUbuntu ( dos Santos et al., 2015 ) as well as scientific articles including BioASQ ( Tsatsaronis et al., 2015 ) and Qasper ( Dasigi et al., 2021 ). In addition, the pandemic saw the creation of many datasets related to COVID-19 such as COVID-QA-2019 ( Möller et al., 2020 ), COVID-QA-147 ( Tang et al., 2020 ), and COVID-QA-111 ( Lee et al., 2020 ). Beyond these datasets focusing on individual domains, there are several datasets spanning multiple domains such as CoQA ( Reddy et al., 2019 ), QuAIL ( Rogers et al., 2020 ), and MultiReQA ( Guo et al., 2021 ), among others. Lastly, the ORB evaluation server ( Dua et al., 2019 ) enables
