# An Overview of Instruction Tuning Data
url: https://www.ruder.io/an-overview-of-instruction-tuning-data/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2023-11-15
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

NLP and ML have gone through several phases of how models are trained in recent years. With the arrival of pre-trained models such as BERT, fine-tuning pre-trained models for downstream tasks became the norm. The increasing capabilities of ever larger models then enabled in-context learning via prompting. Recently, instruction tuning has become the newest method to make LLMs useful. This post covers a range of widely used instruction tuning datasets, as well as important characteristics of instruction tuning data and best practices for using the datasets. This post was first published in NLP News in two articles . What is Instruction Tuning? The main difference between instruction tuning and standard supervised fine-tuning lies in the data that the model is trained on. Whereas supervised fine-tuning trains models on input examples and their corresponding outputs , instruction tuning augments input-output examples with instructions , which enables instruction-tuned models to generalize more easily to new tasks. Pretrain-finetuning vs prompting vs instruction tuning ( Wei et al., 2022 ). Methods differ based on how the instruction tuning data is constructed. Zhang et al. (2023) provide a good overview of existing instruction datasets. Existing datasets fall roughly into two main categories: a) instructions are added to existing NLP tasks; and b) data from (a) is used to condition a model to generate new instruction-input-output tuples. Important Data Characteristics There are a several aspects to consider when using instruction tuning datasets: Data source: How was the data obtained? Most datasets have been generated using ChatGPT. They may thus inherit biases of the source model or may be noisy. Human-written examples are more expensive to obtain but are more high quality. Data quality: Was any filtering done to improve the quality of the generated data? In most cases, filtering is based on simple heuristics or a pre-trained model, which can result in noisy data. For instance, the authors of OpenAssistant Conversations went the extra mile and obtained human-annotated data quality labels. Domain and language coverage: Most datasets cover general QA-style use cases and are in English. However, similar methods can be used to obtain data in other domains or languages. Number of dialog turns: A dialog turn is an utterance by one speaker. Most datasets are single-turn, i.e., they consist of a prompt and a single response. Multi-turn data may be necessary to train a more conversational model. License terms: Data generated using OpenAI models is subject to the OpenAI terms of use , which prohibit using the data to develop competing models. So look for data with a more permissive license to avoid any legal complications. Instruction Tuning Datasets Let us now look at a representative set of widely used instruction tuning datasets, in order of their release: Natural Instructions ( Mishra et al., 2022 ) : 193k instruction-output examples sourced from 61 existing English NLP tasks. Crowd-sourcing instructions from each dataset are aligned to a common schema. Instructions are thus more structured compared to other datasets. Outputs are relatively short , however, which makes the data less useful for generating long-form content. Two instances of Natural Instructions. The instruction schema covers multiple fields including a definition, things to avoid, and positive and negative examples. Natural Instructions v2 / Super-Natural Instructions ( Wang et al., 2022 ) : A crowd-sourced collection of instruction data based on existing NLP tasks and simple synthetic tasks. It includes 5M examples across 76 tasks in 55 languages. Compared to Natural Instructions, instructions are simplified ; they consist of a task definition and positive and negative examples with explanations. Unnatural Instructions ( Honovich et al., 2023 ) : An automatically collected instruction dataset of 240k examples where InstructGPT (text-davinci-002) is prompted with three Super-Natural Instructions examples—consisting of an instruction, input, possible output constraints—and asked to generate a new example. The output is generated separately by conditioning on the generated instruction, input, and constraints. The generated instructions are then further paraphrased by prompting the model. Unnatural Instructions covers a more diverse set of tasks than Super-Natural Instructions; while many examples reflect classical NLP tasks, it also includes examples of other interesting tasks. Examples of eight generated instructions that differ from classical NLP tasks in Unnatural Instructions. Self-Instruct (Wang et al., 2023) : Similar to Unnatural Instructions, Self-Instruct consists of 82k examples automatically generated using InstructGPT conditioned on a set of seed task examples (175 tasks in total; one example per task; 8 examples are sampled for in-context learning). Self-Instruct decouples the example generation by first generating the instruction, then the input (conditioned on instruction), and then the output. For classification tasks, the authors first generate the possible output labels and then condition the input generation on each class label to avoid biasing towards a specific label. While the generated instructions are mostly valid, the generated outputs are often noisy . Examples of generated instruction-input-output tuples in Self-Instruct. P3 ( Public Pool of Prompts; Sanh et al., 2022 ) : A crowd-sourced collection of prompts for 177 English NLP tasks. For each dataset, about 11 different prompts are available on average, which enables studying the impact of different prompt formulations. Compared to the instructions in the above instruction datasets, P3 prompts are often shorter and less elaborate . P3 prompt templates for two existing NLP tasks. Prompt templates use fields of the raw data (e.g., {Document} ) and template metadata (e.g., {Choices[label]} ). xP3, xP3mt (Muennighoff et al., 2023) : An extension of P3 inclu
