# ML and NLP Research Highlights of 2021
url: https://www.ruder.io/ml-highlights-2021/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2022-01-24
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

Credit for the title image: Liu et al. (2021) 2021 saw many exciting advances in machine learning (ML) and natural language processing (NLP). In this post, I will cover the papers and research areas that I found most inspiring. I tried to cover the papers that I was aware of but likely missed many relevant ones. Feel free to highlight them as well as ones that you found inspiring in the comments. I discuss the following highlights: Universal Models Massive Multi-task Learning Beyond the Transformer Prompting Efficient Methods Benchmarking Conditional Image Generation ML for Science Program Synthesis Bias Retrieval Augmentation Token-free Models Temporal Adaptation The Importance of Data Meta-learning 1) Universal Models Self-supervised cross-lingual representation learning on speech using XLS-R. The model is pre-trained on diverse multilingual speech data using a self-supervised wav2vec 2.0-style loss. The trained model can then be fine-tuned on different speech tasks (Babu et al., 2021) . What happened? 2021 saw the continuation of the development of ever larger pre-trained models. Pre-trained models were applied in many different domains and started to be considered critical for ML research [1] . In computer vision, supervised pre-trained models such as Vision Transformer [2] have been scaled up [3] and self-supervised pre-trained models have started to match their performance [4] . The latter have been scaled beyond the controlled environment of ImageNet to random collections of images [5] . In speech, new models have been built based on wav2vec 2.0 [6] such as W2v-BERT [7] as well as more powerful multilingual models such as XLS-R [8] . At the same time, we saw new unified pre-trained models for previously under-researched modality pairs such as for videos and language [9] as well as speech and language [10] . In vision and language, controlled studies shed new light on important components of such multi-modal models [11] [12] . By framing different tasks in the paradigm of language modelling, models have had great success also in other domains such as reinforcement learning [13] and protein structure prediction [14] . Given the observed scaling behaviour of many of these models, it has become common to report performance at different parameter sizes. However, increases in pre-training performance do not necessarily translate to downstream settings [15] [16] . Why is it important? Pre-trained models have been shown to generalize well to new tasks in a given domain or modality. They demonstrate strong few-shot learning behaviour and robust learning capabilities. As such, they are a valuable building block for research advances and enable new practical applications. What’s next? We will undoubtedly see more and even larger pre-trained models developed in the future. At the same time, we should expect individual models to perform more tasks at the same time. This is already the case in language where models can perform many tasks by framing them in a common text-to-text format. Similarly, we will likely see image and speech models that can perform many common tasks in a single model. Finally, we will see more work that trains models for multiple modalities. 2) Massive Multi-task Learning Massive multi-task learning with ExT5. During pre-training, the model is trained on the inputs (left) of a diverse set of different tasks in a text-to-text format to produce the corresponding outputs (right). The tasks include masked language modeling, summarization, semantic parsing, closed-book question answering, style transfer, dialogue modeling, natural language inference, Winograd-schema style coreference resolution (top to bottom), among others (Aribandi et al., 2021) . What happened? Most pre-trained models in the previous section are self-supervised. They generally learn from large amounts of unlabelled data via an objective that does not require explicit supervision. However, for many domains large amounts of labelled data are already available, which can be used to learn better representations. So far, multi-task models such as T0 [17] , FLAN [18] , and ExT5 [19] have been pre-trained on around 100 tasks mainly for language. Such massive multi-task learning is closely related to meta-learning. Given access to a diverse task distribution [20] , models can learn to learn different types of behaviour such as how to do in-context learning [21] . Why is it important? Massive multi-task learning is possible due to the fact that many recent models such as T5 and GPT-3 use a text-to-text format. Models thus no longer require hand-engineered task-specific loss functions or task-specific layers in order to effectively learn across multiple tasks. Such recent approaches highlight the benefit of combining self-supervised pre-training with supervised multi-task learning and demonstrate that a combination of both leads to models that are more general. What’s next? Given the availability and open-source nature of datasets in a unified format, we can imagine a virtuous cycle where newly created high-quality datasets are used to train more powerful models on increasingly diverse task collections, which could then be used in-the-loop to create more challenging datasets. 3) Beyond the Transformer The Perceiver projects a high-dimensional input byte array via cross-attention to a fixed-dimensional latent array, which it processes with a transformer self-attention block. Cross-attention and self-attention blocks are then applied alternatingly (Jaegle et al., 2021) . What happened? Most pre-trained models discussed in the previous sections build on the transformer architecture [22] . 2021 saw the development of alternative model architectures that are viable alternatives to the transformer. The Perceiver [23] is a transformer-like architecture that scales to very high-dimensional inputs by using a latent array of a fixed dimensionality as its base representation and conditioning this on the input via cross-attenti
