# EMNLP 2023 Primer
url: https://www.ruder.io/emnlp-2023-primer/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2023-12-05
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

EMNLP 2023 , one of the biggest NLP conferences takes place this week from Dec 6–10 in Singapore. In this post, I’ll discuss a selection of exciting papers and workshops I’m looking forward to at the conference. Here are the main trends I observed (based on the small sample of papers I discuss here and those I came across online): Instruction-tuned LMs and LLMs are everywhere. Similar to earlier years where BERT was ubiquitous, instruction-tuned language models (LMs) and large language models (LLMs) are used in almost every paper. Evaluation based on LLMs is increasingly common. While some papers employ automatic evaluation based on GPT-4, new metrics that are proposed are based on LLMs in zero-shot prompted or fine-tuned settings. Prompt usage is getting more creative. Beyond a standard prompt template, prompts are getting increasingly complex and specialized to the desired setting. Techniques such as chain-of-thought prompting are common tools. Multilinguality is increasingly popular. I came across a substantial number of papers studying multilingual settings, which indicates that LLMs are still limited in non-English settings and that making LLMs more multilingual is an important direction. On the other hand, I did not come across many papers that tried to analyze LLM properties (using a synthetic setup, for instance) or that used external models or tools to augment LLMs ( please point me to papers that I missed ). This is in contrast to NeurIPS 2023 where such papers were more common . Papers with a † are presented in Findings of EMNLP (rather than the main conference). I am an author/co-organizer on papers/events indicated with a *. This post was first published in NLP News . Workshops GenBench Workshop , Dec 6. Generalization is crucial to ensure robust model behavior but how good generalization looks like and how it should be evaluated is still not well understood. The GenBench workshop on (benchmarking) generalization in NLP aims to catalyse research on generalization and how to measure it in the NLP community. Accepted papers study generalization or are BIG-bench -style collaborative benchmarking tasks (CBT). The program consists of invited talks, CBT spotlights as well as oral presentations and posters. Workshop for NLP Open-Source Software (NLP-OSS) , Dec 6. In light of the increasing number of closed-source LLMs, it is important to continue to promote an open culture of sharing knowledge, data, and software, from which the NLP community has benefited greatly. This workshop aims to further the sharing of insights regarding the creation and development of NLP open-source software. Invited talks feature important NLP open-source projects including trlX , a framework for large-scale open-source RLHF and SEA-LION , LLMs pre-trained for Southeast Asian languages. The Big Picture Workshop: Crafting a Research Narrative , Dec 7 *. In research, we “stand on the shoulders of giants”. However, given the number and rapid pace of published papers, it has become increasingly difficult, to recognize the larger story to which a paper is connected. The Big Picture Workshop aims to explore and distill such broader research narratives. We have a diverse set of accepted papers that provide insightful syntheses of different threads of research. On the workshop day, we’ll try out a new presentation format where we have researchers from different groups working on the same topic critically reflect on and discuss their work. Multilingual Representation Learning Workshop (MRL) , Dec 7* . This workshop provides a forum to discuss work to improve NLP in low-resource and under-represented languages. The large number of accepted papers and Findings papers explore a diverse set of methods, from meta-learning to tokenization and instruction tuning. In addition, shared task on multilingual multi-task information retrieval provided new data for NER and QA for a typologically diverse set of languages. The workshop day is jam-packed with excellent invited talks, poster, shared task and best paper sessions. Unanswerability and attribution in QA In question answering (QA), a crucial challenge for current LLMs is hallucinating answers. A scenario where such hallucinations are common is when questions do not have an answer. To deal with hallucinations, a promising strategy is to train the model to attribute the answer to relevant references. The Curious Case of Hallucinatory (Un)answerability: Finding Truths in the Hidden States of Over-Confident Large Language Models (Slobodkin et al.) . This work shows that LLMs are aware of the concept of (un)answerability and that the representation of the first decoded token provides a strong indicator whether a question is answerable (removing this information in the first token significantly decreases performance). Furthermore, mentioning that the question is unanswerable in the prompt improves performance. These results highlight that developing better decoding methods will also help make LLMs more factual. Evaluating and Modeling Attribution for Cross-Lingual Question Answering (Muller et al.) *. This paper introduces attribution for cross-lingual question answering where the document supporting the generated answer may be in a different language than the question and answer. It creates the XOR-AttriQA dataset to measure attribution of SOTA QA models across 5 languages. Surprisingly, a large portion of generated answers are not attributable to any retrieved passage (up to 47% of correctly predicted answers in Japanese are not attributable). Current QA systems are thus often right but without any evidence, making them untrustworthy. Multilingual LLMs can be used to accurately detect attribution (which can complement string-based evaluation metrics) and can be used to rerank generated answers, improving QA performance. Key research directions are a) improving retrieval of cross-lingual passages and b) designing robust LLM-based metrics for QA evaluation. Instruction tuning 
