# Thoughts on the 2024 AI Job Market
url: https://www.ruder.io/thoughts-on-the-2024-ai-job-market/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2024-02-12
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

It’s crazy how the AI and NLP landscape has evolved over the last five years. 5 years ago, around the time I finished my PhD, if you wanted to work on cutting-edge natural language processing (NLP), your choice was relatively limited. Recently, I decided to go on the job market again, which has become much more diverse. In this post, I want to highlight some macro trends that I observed and the reasons that I joined my new company, Cohere , which may be helpful in guiding your own job search. Note: This post reflects my personal opinions and not those of my previous and current employers. It is written from my perspective as a Europe-based researcher focused on NLP. If you are interested in AI companies but have a different skillset, some of these thoughts should still be relevant to you. This post was first published in NLP News . AI Job Market Trends 1. Research has become more applied. In the past, most problems at the forefront of ML and NLP were firmly in the purview of fundamental or basic research. As models were not powerful enough, datasets reflected simplified evaluation settings that were feasible at the time and typically far removed from applications. In order to work on such cutting-edge problems, you generally had the choice of joining academia or going to a handful of big tech labs (Google Research/Brain, DeepMind, FAIR, MSR, etc). For research advances to make their way into products could take a team months or years of dedicated work—if it succeeded at all. An exception is machine translation where research breakthroughs such as the emergence of statistical MT and neural MT resulted in concrete product improvements. On the other hand, applied research departments directly worked on improving a specific application. In light of the emergence of pre-training ( NLP’s ‘ImageNet moment’ ) and models becoming more powerful, the gap between fundamental and applied research in NLP has consistently narrowed: The integration of BERT -based representations led to one of the biggest quality leaps in Google Search history and the recent generation of large language models (LLMs) enabled a plethora of new applications. Problems that were previously in the domain of basic research (how to measure generation quality, how to teach models to reason, how to learn with long-range dependencies, etc) now impact real-world applications. As a result, new advances in research have the potential to have a much broader impact. This leads to many new opportunities and emerging research areas. However, it also means that researchers must consider challenges regarding the safe and responsible use of such technology. As the Generative AI space heats up, new research breakthroughs are perceived to provide an edge over the competition. As a result, publishing them has become more challenging. In addition, with increasing proximity to product, doing purely curiosity-driven research has become more difficult: when most other research has immediate product impact, how do you justify working on an unproven direction? For researchers, this requires balancing short-term impact with long-term research potential, with the scale tilting to the former. To encourage long-term research in this application-oriented climate, companies need to create an environment that still rewards open-ended directions. With companies focusing on applications, researchers in academia should focus on unexplored directions and look to the blue skies . While compute requirements for research have increased, there are plenty of less compute-intensive directions . 2. Startups are a serious alternative to a PhD. When people have asked me for advice in the past on whether they should do a PhD, I generally told them that it’s well worth the time investment. Not only does it unlock research jobs that require a PhD, it also is a great way to focus on your personal growth. 2 In light of the applied nature of current research problems, there is another path that exposes you to cutting-edge AI work: joining a startup. To be sure, startups—particularly early-stage ones—are not for everyone. They require a person with a certain type of mindset and motivation: Someone who enjoys solving real-world problems and having a tangible, direct impact; who can work autonomously and without much guidance; who thrives in a hectic, unstructured environment and can handle ambiguity. But if you’re comfortable in these conditions, you can acquire certain skills and knowledge much faster than in a typical PhD. You will also get hands-on experience with emerging methodologies such as instruction and preference tuning, red-teaming, LLM alignment, etc, which can prove invaluable for your career. Of course, in a startup, your work is typically determined by the company’s needs rather than your own interests so you need to be flexible. A PhD is still the best option for you if you would like to follow your own curiosity and focus on your personal development; if you enjoy to go deep and fully dedicate yourself to a topic; if you value collaboration and mentorship; and if you enjoy being creative and coming up with genuinely new ideas. A scientific mindset as well as other research-related skills such as designing ablations and testing for hypotheses, publishing, and developing research taste , among many others, are also more easily learned during a PhD. 3. ML has become less open and more polarized. An amazing attribute of the ML community has been that much of ML development and research has been conducted in the open. The top ML journal JMLR was founded in 2000 with the goal to provide open access to its publications. Conferences provide free access to their proceedings online. ML frameworks such as TensorFlow and PyTorch were originally developed by companies and then open-sourced. In NLP, journals and conferences are similarly open-access and open-source libraries such as Transformers are common building blocks. Early pre-trained models such as ELMo , ULMFiT , G
