# True Zero-shot MT
url: https://www.ruder.io/true-zero-shot-mt/
author: Sebastian Ruder
published_at: 2024-02-27
persona_id: sebastian_ruder

---

Little over a week ago, Gemini 1.5 reported close to human-level performance on MTOB , a recent challenging translation dataset. In this post, we’ll dig into this result, explore true zero-shot machine translation (MT), and consider how to teach LLMs a new language like humans. This post was first published in NLP News . Low-resource MT To set the scene, let’s first consider what it means for a language to be considered “low-resource”. As with LLMs, the performance of MT models depends on the amount of training data—both parallel and monolingual—available in a given language. As a result, there is a gulf between languages with lots of data and languages with little data in common pre-training corpora. The latter are typically referred to as “low-resource”. To bridge the gap between resource-rich and resource-poor languages and make machine translation more accessible, new translation benchmarks have been created that cater specifically to low-resource languages. The Conference on Machine Translation (WMT) now regularly hosts shared tasks on low-resource MT such as for Indic and African languages ; workshops such as AmericasNLP support indigenous languages ; and large-scale decentralized collaborations such as Masakhane , SEACrowd and Aya created MT datasets for African languages , Indonesian languages , and 100+ languages respectively. Recently, FLORES-200 expands translation data coverage to 200 languages. Beyond theses efforts, through extensive work on data cleaning, filtering, and language identification, researchers have been able to obtain data and train MT models for 1000+ languages ( Bapna et al., 2022 ; NLLB Team, 2022 ). LLMs are typically trained on parallel data ( Kale et al., 2021 ) and are increasingly used for translation ( Vilar et al., 2023 ). However, in light of ever-larger pre-training datasets, the opacity of pre-training data, and challenges of language identification on the web ( Caswell et al., 2020 ), it is unclear how much data LLMs have seen in a low-resource language during pre-training. Chances are that most LLMs have seen some data in most languages that are available on the web. From an experimental perspective, it is thus not straightforward to assess how much data LLMs actually need to learn to translate in a new language. While we could restrict the languages a model is trained on and examine its performance on a held-out language with increasing amounts of training data, we know that most LLM capabilities only emerge at scale. So how can we study the translation abilities of fully pre-trained LLMs in a controlled setting? True Zero-shot MT To study this setting, we have to look at translating a language that was truly unseen during pre-training. For simplicity, I use the term true zero-shot MT to designate the setting of translating to a language with no pre-training data using only in-context learning data. While we can find data for 1500+ languages on the web ( Bapna et al., 2022 ), there are around 7000+ languages spoken around the world. So the remaining 5500 languages with little or no presence online are potential candidates for our target language. As expected, for these languages there is very little data available that has been used in standard LLM pipelines. Interestingly, the resources that are available for these languages are similar to those humans might use to learn a second language (L2) including: a list of words and their translations to learn a language’s vocabulary; paired sentences to learn about word usage, word order, and some morphology; a grammar book to study the structure of the language. Let’s take a look at how these resources can be used by LLMs: 1. A Bilingual Word List Database coverage of bilingual word lists in PanLex . While lists of words and their translation only teach us a limited amount about a new language, they are available for a huge number of languages thanks to projects such as PanLex . However, for many languages, they only contain translation pairs for a small number of terms such as the numbers from 1–10. Bilingual lexicons have been a core resource for aligning word embeddings across languages ( Ruder et al., 2019 ). They also have been used to bootstrap unsupervised MT systems ( Artetxe et al., 2018 ), though, translating text word-by-word does not get you far, even if you account for word order differences ( Lample et al., 2018 ). On the other hand, even in the best LLMs, cross-lingual alignment of words in the vocabulary is still not perfect. Bilingual lexicons are thus a potential viable—and large-coverage—form of supervision. There are multiple ways in which they can be used with LLMs: data augmentation : “noisy” code-mixed samples are created by replacing words in source language sentences with their target language translations ( Wang et al., 2022 , Reid & Artetxe, 2022 ); lexical prompting : prepending <source word, translation> pairs to the prompt for source words that occur in the input ( Ghazvininejad et al., 2023 ); parallel data : <source word, translation> pairs are treated as “sentence” pairs and added to the existing parallel data. Jones et al. (2023) compare several augmentations. They find that they provide similar gains for unsupervised machine translation and that high-quality bilingual lexicons such as GATITOS are crucial. Recently, Koto et al. (2024) use PanLex to extend sentiment lexicons to more languages while Yong et al. (2024) generate data that maximizes lexical overlap with downstream tasks. 2. Few Parallel Sentences Parallel data is the bread and butter of MT research. MT models and LLMs are trained on millions of parallel sentences. Prior work on low-resource MT such as for Nepalese–English used 100,000s of parallel sentences ( Guzmán et al., 2019 ). More recent work studied the impact of around 1–6k professionally translated sentences across different low-resource languages ( Maillard et al., 2023 ). They find that already 1,000s of high-quality parallel sentences are help
