# What I learned from looking at 900 most popular open source AI tools
url: https://huyenchip.com//2024/03/14/ai-oss.html
author: Chip Huyen
published_at: 2024-03-14
persona_id: chip_huyen

---

[ Hacker News discussion , LinkedIn discussion , Twitter thread ] Update (Feb 2026) : The full list of open source AI repos is hosted at Good AI List , updated daily. It’s balooned to 15K repos, and you can submit missing repos. You can also find some of them on my cool-llm-repos list on GitHub. Four years ago, I did an analysis of the open source ML ecosystem . Since then, the landscape has changed, so I revisited the topic. This time, I focused exclusively on the stack around foundation models. Data I searched GitHub using the keywords gpt , llm , and generative ai . If AI feels so overwhelming right now, it’s because it is. There are 118K results for gpt alone. To make my life easier, I limited my search to the repos with at least 500 stars. There were 590 results for llm , 531 for gpt , and 38 for generative ai . I also occasionally checked GitHub trending and social media for new repos. After MANY hours, I found 896 repos. Of these, 51 are tutorials (e.g. dair-ai/Prompt-Engineering-Guide ) and aggregated lists (e.g. f/awesome-chatgpt-prompts ). While these tutorials and lists are helpful, I’m more interested in software. I still include them in the final list, but the analysis is done with the 845 software repositories. It was a painful but rewarding process. It gave me a much better understanding of what people are working on, how incredibly collaborative the open source community is, and just how much China’s open source ecosystem diverges from the Western one. The New AI Stack I think of the AI stack as consisting of 3 layers: infrastructure, model development, and application development. Infrastructure At the bottom is the stack is infrastructure, which includes toolings for serving ( vllm , NVIDIA’s Triton ), compute management ( skypilot ), vector search and database ( faiss , milvus , qdrant , lancedb ), …. Model development This layer provides toolings for developing models, including frameworks for modeling & training (transformers, pytorch, DeepSpeed), inference optimization (ggml, openai/triton), dataset engineering, evaluation, ….. Anything that involves changing a model’s weights happens in this layer, including finetuning. Application development With readily available models, anyone can develop applications on top of them. This is the layer that has seen the most actions in the last 2 years and is still rapidly evolving. This layer is also known as AI engineering. Application development involves prompt engineering, RAG, AI interface, … Outside of these 3 layers, I also have two other categories: Model repos , which are created by companies and researchers to share the code associated with their models. Examples of repos in this category are CompVis/stable-diffusion , openai/whisper , and facebookresearch/llama . Applications built on top of existing models. The most popular types of applications are coding, workflow automation, information aggregation, … Note : In an older version of this post, Applications was included as another layer in the stack. AI stack over time I plotted the cumulative number of repos in each category month-over-month. There was an explosion of new toolings in 2023, after the introduction of Stable Diffusion and ChatGPT. The curve seems to flatten in September 2023 because of three potential reasons. I only include repos with at least 500 stars in my analysis, and it takes time for repos to gather these many stars. Most low-hanging fruits have been picked. What is left takes more effort to build, hence fewer people can build them. People have realized that it’s hard to be competitive in the generative AI space, so the excitement has calmed down. Anecdotally, in early 2023, all AI conversations I had with companies centered around gen AI, but the recent conversations are more grounded. Several even brought up scikit-learn. I’d like to revisit this in a few months to verify if it’s true. In 2023, the layers that saw the highest increases were the applications and application development layers. The infrastructure layer saw a little bit of growth, but it was far from the level of growth seen in other layers. Applications Not surprisingly, the most popular types of applications are coding, bots (e.g. role-playing, WhatsApp bots, Slack bots), and information aggregation (e.g. “let’s connect this to our Slack and ask it to summarize the messages each day”). AI engineering 2023 was the year of AI engineering. Since many of them are similar, it’s hard to categorize the tools. I currently put them into the following categories: prompt engineering, AI interface, Agent, and AI engineering (AIE) framework. Prompt engineering goes way beyond fiddling with prompts to cover things like constrained sampling (structured outputs), long-term memory management, prompt testing & evaluation, etc. AI interface provides an interface for your end users to interact with your AI application. This is the category I’m the most excited about. Some of the interfaces that are gaining popularity are: Web and desktop apps. Browser extensions that let users quickly query AI models while browsing. Bots via chat apps like Slack, Discord, WeChat, and WhatsApp. Plugins that let developers embed AI applications to applications like VSCode, Shopify, and Microsoft Offices. The plugin approach is common for AI applications that can use tools to complete complex tasks (agents). AIE framework is a catch-all term for all platforms that help you develop AI applications. Many of them are built around RAG, but many also provide other toolings such as monitoring, evaluation, etc. Agent is a weird category, as many agent toolings are just sophisticated prompt engineering with potentially constrained generation (e.g. the model can only output the predetermined action) and plugin integration (e.g. to let the agent use tools). Model development Pre-ChatGPT, the AI stack was dominated by model development. Model development’s biggest growth in 2023 came from increasing interest in inference opti
