# Multimodality and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs)
url: https://huyenchip.com//2023/10/10/multimodal.html
author: Chip Huyen
published_at: 2023-10-10
persona_id: chip_huyen

---

For a long time, each ML model operated in one data mode – text (translation, language modeling), image (object detection, image classification), or audio (speech recognition). However, natural intelligence is not limited to just a single modality. Humans can read, talk, and see. We listen to music to relax and watch out for strange noises to detect danger. Being able to work with multimodal data is essential for us or any AI to operate in the real world. OpenAI noted in their GPT-4V system card that “ incorporating additional modalities (such as image inputs) into LLMs is viewed by some as a key frontier in AI research and development .” Incorporating additional modalities to LLMs (Large Language Models) creates LMMs (Large Multimodal Models). Not all multimodal systems are LMMs. For example, text-to-image models like Midjourney, Stable Diffusion, and Dall-E are multimodal but don’t have a language model component. Multimodal can mean one or more of the following: Input and output are of different modalities (e.g. text-to-image, image-to-text) Inputs are multimodal (e.g. a system that can process both text and images) Outputs are multimodal (e.g. a system that can generate both text and images) This post covers multimodal systems in general, including LMMs. It consists of 3 parts. Part 1 covers the context for multimodality, including why multimodal, different data modalities, and types of multimodal tasks. Part 2 discusses the fundamentals of a multimodal system, using the examples of CLIP, which lays the foundation for many future multimodal systems, and Flamingo, whose impressive performance gave rise to LMMs. Part 3 discusses some active research areas for LMMs, including generating multimodal outputs and adapters for more efficient multimodal training, covering newer multimodal systems such as BLIP-2, LLaVA, LLaMA-Adapter V2, LAVIN, etc. The post is long. Feel free to skip to the sections most interesting to you. ⚠ Ambiguous terminology ⚠ Multimodal data can also refer to multimodal distributions, e.g. bimodal distribution, which is different from multimodal data in this post. Table of contents Part 1. Understanding Multimodal …. Why multimodal …. Data modalities …. Multimodal tasks …….. Generation …….. Vision-language understanding Part 2. Fundamentals of Multimodal Training …. CLIP: Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training …….. CLIP’s high-level architecture …….. Natural language supervision …….. Contrastive learning …….. CLIP applications …. Flamingo: the dawns of LMMs …….. Flamingo’s high-level architecture …….. Data …….. Flamingo’s vision encoder …….. Flamingo’s language model …. TL;DR: CLIP vs. Flamingo Part 3. Research Directions for LMMs …. Incorporating more data modalities …. Multimodal systems for instruction-following …. Adapters for more efficient multimodal training …. Generating multimodal outputs Conclusion Resources Part 1. Understanding Multimodal Why multimodal Many use cases are impossible without multimodality, especially those in industries that deal with a mixture of data modalities such as healthcare, robotics, e-commerce, retail, gaming, etc. An example of how multimodality can be used in healthcare. Image from Multimodal biomedical AI (Acosta et al., Nature Medicine 2022) Not only that, incorporating data from other modalities can help boost model performance. Shouldn’t a model that can learn from both text and images perform better than a model that can learn from only text or only image? Multimodal systems can provide a more flexible interface, allowing you to interact with them in whichever way works best for you at the moment. Imagine you can ask a question by typing, talking, or just pointing your camera at something. One use case that I’m especially excited about, is that multimodality can also enable visually impaired people to browse the Internet and also navigate the real world. Some cool multimodal use cases from GPT-4V Data modalities Different data modes are text, image, audio, tabular data, etc. One data mode can be represented or approximated in another data mode. For example: Audio can be represented as images (mel spectrograms). Speech can be transcribed into text, though its text-only representation loses information such as volume, intonation, pauses, etc. An image can be represented as a vector, which, in turn, can be flattened and represented as a sequence of text tokens. A video is a sequence of images plus audio. ML models today mostly treat videos as sequences of images. This is a severe limitation, as sounds have proved to be just as important as visuals for videos. 88% of TikTok users shared that sound is essential for their TikTok experience . A text can be represented as an image if you simply take a picture of it. A data table can be converted into a chart, which is an image. How about other data modalities? All digital data formats can be represented using bitstrings (strings of 0 and 1) or bytestrings. A model that can effectively learn from bitstrings or bytestrings will be very powerful, and it can learn from any data mode. There are other data modalities we haven’t touched on, such as graphs and 3D assets. We also haven’t touched on the formats used to represent smell and touch (haptics). In ML today, audio is still largely treated as a voice-based alternative to text. The most common use cases for audio are still speech recognition (speech-to-text) and speech synthesis (text-to-speech). Non-speech audio use cases, e.g. music generation, are still pretty niche. See the fake Drake & Weeknd song and MusicGen model on HuggingFace . Image is perhaps the most versatile format for model inputs, as it can be used to represent text, tabular data, audio, and to some extent, videos. There’s also so much more visual data than text data. We have phones/webcams that constantly take pictures and videos today. Text is a much more powerful mode for model outputs. A model that can generate images can only be used for image generation, wherea
