# Predictive Human Preference: From Model Ranking to Model Routing
url: https://huyenchip.com//2024/02/28/predictive-human-preference.html
author: Chip Huyen
published_at: 2024-02-28
persona_id: chip_huyen

---

A challenge of building AI applications is choosing which model to use. What if we don’t have to? What if we can predict the best model for any prompt? Predictive human preference aims to predict which model users might prefer for a specific query. Human preference has emerged to be both the Northstar and a powerful tool for AI model development. Human preference guides post-training techniques including RLHF and DPO . Human preference is also used to rank AI models, as used by LMSYS’s Chatbot Arena . Chatbot Arena aims to determine which model is generally preferred. I wanted to see if it’s possible to predict which model is preferred for each query . One use case of predictive human preference is model routing. For example, if we know in advance that for a prompt, users will prefer Claude Instant’s response over GPT-4, and Claude Instant is cheaper/faster than GPT-4, we can route this prompt to Claude Instant. Model routing has the potential to increase response quality while reducing costs and latency. Another use case of predictive human preference is interpretability. Mapping out a model’s performance on different prompts can help us understand this model’s strengths and weaknesses. See section Experiment results for examples. Here’s what predictive human preference for different model pairs looks like for the prompt “ What’s the best way to cluster text embeddings? ”. The predictions were generated by my toy preference predictor. The bright yellow color for the (GPT-4, GPT-3.5-Turbo) cell means that my predictor thinks GPT-4’s response is very likely to be preferred to that of GPT-3.5-Turbo’s for this prompt. This post first discusses the correctness of Chatbot Arena, which will then be used as a baseline to evaluate the correctness of preference predictions. It then discusses how to build a preference predictor and the initial results. Ranking Models Using Human Preference Using preferential signals (comparisons) to rank models has grown in popularity in the last few years. Other than powering LMSYS’s Chatbot Arena , it’s also used by many model providers ( Anthropic , Gemini, ChatGPT, etc.) to evaluate their models in production. Side note : Friends who have deployed this in production told me that most users don’t read both options and just randomly vote for one. This introduces a lot of noise. However, the signals from the small percentage of users who vote correctly can sometimes be sufficient to help determine which model is preferred, as long as there’s minimal bias in the random voting. How Preferential Ranking Works Preferential ranking works in two steps: Collect comparison data about user preference. Compute a model ranking from these comparisons. For each request, two or more models are selected to respond. An evaluator, which can be human or AI, picks the winner. The evaluator shouldn’t know which models are being judged. Each comparison is called a match . This process results in a series of comparisons. table { border-collapse: collapse; width: 100%; } th, td { padding: 8px; text-align: left; border-bottom: 1px solid #ddd; } Match ID Prompt Model A Model B Winner 1 … Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 2 … Model 3 Model 1 Model 1 3 … Model 1 Model 4 Model 4 ... ... ... ... ... From these comparisons, we need to compute the rankings of all models. The two most common ranking algorithms are Elo (from chess) and TrueSkill (from video games). While Chatbot Arena refers to their model scores “Elo scores”, they actually don’t use Elo. In December 2023, they switched to Bradley-Terry but scaled the resulting scores to make them look Elo-like (see their notebook ). Given a history of match outcomes, the Bradley-Terry algorithm finds the model scores that maximize the likelihood of these match outcomes, turning model scoring into a maximum likelihood estimation problem. The input, for each training example, is the models that participate in the match. The output is the outcome of the match. Assuming there’s no draw, the outcome of a match is either 0 (a wins) or 1 (b wins). Correctness of Chatbot Arena Ranking Given the same match outcomes, different ranking algorithms can produce different rankings. For example, the ranking computed by Elo might differ from the ranking computed by Bradley-Terry. How do we know that a ranking is correct? At its core, model ranking is a predictive problem. We compute a ranking from historical match outcomes and use it to predict future match outcomes. The quality of a ranking is determined by how accurately it can predict future match outcomes. Let’s say we have a match between model A and model B. If model A has a higher score, meaning that the ranking algorithm predicts that A wins. If users indeed prefer the higher-ranking model, the ranking algorithm makes a correct prediction. Eval data To compute the accuracy of Chatbot Arena ranking, I used their data published in July 2023, which consists of 33K crowd-sourced comparisons for matches among 20 models. I used this smaller dataset instead of their Jan 2024 dataset because this smaller dataset contains the prompt used for each match, which I need for predictive human preference. Benchmarking on this dataset allows me to compare my model with the Bradley-Terry algorithm later on. Here’s an example from their July 2023 dataset. table { border-collapse: collapse; width: 100%; } th:not(:last-child), td:not(:last-child) { padding: 8px; text-align: left; border-bottom: 1px solid #ddd; border-right: 1px solid #ddd; } prompt model_a model_b winner model_a's response model_b's response who was the last monarch of uk koala-13b vicuna-13b model_a The last monarch of the United Kingdom was Queen Elizabeth II, who reigned from 1952 to 2020. The current monarch of the United Kingdom is Queen Elizabeth II. She has been the monarch since 1952, and is the longest-reigning monarch in British history. For reference, the Bradley-Terry (BT) scores of the top 7 models in this dataset are as follows. GPT-4: 1189 Claude-v1: 1
