# Building A Generative AI Platform
url: https://huyenchip.com//2024/07/25/genai-platform.html
author: Chip Huyen
published_at: 2024-07-25
persona_id: chip_huyen

---

After studying how companies deploy generative AI applications, I noticed many similarities in their platforms. This post outlines the common components of a generative AI platform, what they do, and how they are implemented. I try my best to keep the architecture general, but certain applications might deviate. This is what the overall architecture looks like. This is a pretty complex system. This post will start from the simplest architecture and progressively add more components. In its simplest form, your application receives a query and sends it to the model. The model generates a response, which is returned to the user. There are no guardrails, no augmented context, and no optimization. The Model API box refers to both third-party APIs (e.g., OpenAI, Google, Anthropic) and self-hosted APIs. From this, you can add more components as needs arise. The order discussed in this post is common, though you don’t need to follow the exact same order. A component can be skipped if your system works well without it. Evaluation is necessary at every step of the development process. Enhance context input into a model by giving the model access to external data sources and tools for information gathering. Put in guardrails to protect your system and your users. Add model router and gateway to support complex pipelines and add more security. Optimize for latency and costs with cache. Add complex logic and write actions to maximize your system’s capabilities. Observability, which allows you to gain visibility into your system for monitoring and debugging, and orchestration, which involves chaining all the components together, are two essential components of the platform. We will discuss them at the end of this post. » What this post is not « This post focuses on the overall architecture for deploying AI applications. It discusses what components are needed and considerations when building these components. It’s not about how to build AI applications and, therefore, does NOT discuss model evaluation, application evaluation, prompt engineering, finetuning, data annotation guidelines, or chunking strategies for RAGs. All these topics are covered in my upcoming book AI Engineering . Step 1. Enhance Context The initial expansion of a platform usually involves adding mechanisms to allow the system to augment each query with the necessary information. Gathering the relevant information is called context construction. Many queries require context to answer. The more relevant information there is in the context, the less the model has to rely on its internal knowledge, which can be unreliable due to its training data and training methodology. Studies have shown that having access to relevant information in the context can help the model generate more detailed responses while reducing hallucinations ( Lewis et al. , 2020). For example, given the query “Will Acme’s fancy-printer-A300 print 100pps?”, the model will be able to respond better if it’s given the specifications of fancy-printer-A300. (Thanks Chetan Tekur for the example.) Context construction for foundation models is equivalent to feature engineering for classical ML models. They serve the same purpose: giving the model the necessary information to process an input. In-context learning, learning from the context, is a form of continual learning. It enables a model to incorporate new information continually to make decisions, preventing it from becoming outdated. For example, a model trained on last-week data won’t be able to answer questions about this week unless the new information is included in its context. By updating a model’s context with the latest information, e.g. fancy-printer-A300’s latest specifications, the model remains up-to-date and can respond to queries beyond its cut-off date. RAGs The most well-known pattern for context construction is RAG, Retrieval-Augmented Generation. RAG consists of two components: a generator (e.g. a language model) and a retriever, which retrieves relevant information from external sources. Retrieval isn’t unique to RAGs. It’s the backbone of search engines, recommender systems, log analytics, etc. Many retrieval algorithms developed for traditional retrieval systems can be used for RAGs. External memory sources typically contain unstructured data, such as memos, contracts, news updates, etc. They can be collectively called documents . A document can be 10 tokens or 1 million tokens. Naively retrieving whole documents can cause your context to be arbitrarily long. RAG typically requires documents to be split into manageable chunks , which can be determined from the model’s maximum context length and your application’s latency requirements. To learn more about chunking and the optimal chunk size, see Pinecone , Langchain , Llamaindex , and Greg Kamradt ’s tutorials. Once data from external memory sources has been loaded and chunked, retrieval is performed using two main approaches. Term-based retrieval This can be as simple as keyword search. For example, given the query “transformer”, fetch all documents containing this keyword. More sophisticated algorithms include BM25 (which leverages TF-IDF) and Elasticsearch (which leverages inverted index). Term-based retrieval is usually used for text data, but it also works for images and videos that have text metadata such as titles, tags, captions, comments, etc. Embedding-based retrieval (also known as vector search) You convert chunks of data into embedding vectors using an embedding model such as BERT , sentence-transformers , and proprietary embedding models provided by OpenAI or Google. Given a query, the data whose vectors are closest to the query embedding, as determined by the vector search algorithm, is retrieved. Vector search is usually framed as nearest-neighbor search, using approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) algorithms such as FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search), Google’s ScaNN , Spotify’s ANNOY , and hnswlib ( Hierarchical Navigable Small World
